Each soul is potentially divine. The goal is to manifest this divinity within by controlling nature, external and internal.
You cannot believe in God until you believe in yourself.
Arise, awake, and stop not till the goal is reached.
The greatest religion is to be true to your own nature. Have faith in yourselves.
All the powers in the universe are already ours. It is we who have put our hands before our eyes and cry that it is dark.
The moment I have realized God sitting in the temple of every human body, the moment I stand in reverence before every human being and see God in him - that moment I am free from bondage.
We are what our thoughts have made us; so take care about what you think. Words are secondary. Thoughts live; they travel far.
Stand up, be bold, be strong. Take the whole responsibility on your own shoulders, and know that you are the creator of your own destiny.
The whole secret of existence is to have no fear. Never fear what will become of you, depend on no one. Only the moment you reject all help are you freed.
In a conflict between the heart and the brain, follow your heart.
Truth can be stated in a thousand different ways, yet each one can be true.
All differences in this world are of degree, and not of kind, because oneness is the secret of everything.
The Vedanta recognizes no sin, it only recognizes error. And the greatest error, says the Vedanta, is to say that you are weak, that you are a sinner, a miserable creature.
Everything is easy when you are busy. But nothing is easy when you are lazy.
The great secret of true success, of true happiness, is this: the man or woman who asks for no return, the perfectly unselfish person, is the most successful.
Take up one idea. Make that one idea your life - think of it, dream of it, live on that idea. This is the way to success.
The world is the great gymnasium where we come to make ourselves strong.
It is our own mental attitude which makes the world what it is for us. Our thoughts make things beautiful, our thoughts make things ugly.
The fire that warms us can also consume us; it is not the fault of the fire.
Do not stand on a high pedestal and take five cents in your hand and say, 'Here, my poor man,' but be grateful that the poor man is there, so that by making a gift to him you are able to help yourself.
Condemn none: if you can stretch out a helping hand, do so. If you cannot, fold your hands, bless your brothers, and let them go their own way.
The powers of the mind are like rays of light dissipated; when they are concentrated, they illumine.
The history of the world is the history of a few men who had faith in themselves.
If faith in ourselves had been more extensively taught and practiced, I am sure a very large portion of the evils and miseries that we have would have vanished.
Feel nothing, know nothing, do nothing, have nothing, give up all to God, and say utterly, 'Thy will be done.' We only dream this bondage. Wake up and let it go.
All knowledge that the world has ever received comes from the mind; the infinite library of the universe is in our own mind.
The greatest sin is to think yourself weak.
That man has reached immortality who is disturbed by nothing material.
The more we come out and do good to others, the more our hearts will be purified, and God will be in them.
There is no help for you outside of yourself; you are the creator of the universe.
It is impossible to think about the welfare of the world unless the condition of women is improved. It is impossible for a bird to fly on only one wing.
Learn everything that is good from others, but bring it in, and in your own way absorb it; do not become others.
The Vedanta teaches men to have faith in themselves first.
The moment you fear, you are nobody. It is fear that is the greatest cause of misery in the world.
Spirituality can be realized nowhere except in the world.
By the study of different religions we find that in essence they are one.
Let positive, strong, helpful thoughts enter into your brains from very childhood.
Strength is life, weakness is death. Expansion is life, contraction is death. Love is life, hatred is death.
God is to be worshipped as the one beloved, dearer than everything in this and next life.
The Vedanta recognises no sin, it only recognises error. And the greatest error, says the Vedanta, is to say that you are weak, that you are a sinner, a miserable creature, and that you have no power and you cannot do this and that.
The greatest help to spiritual life is meditation. In meditation we divest ourselves of all material conditions and feel our divine nature.
Where can we go to find God if we cannot see Him in our own hearts and in every living being?
The first sign that you are becoming religious is that you are becoming cheerful.
The selfless man is not deluded by matter into identifying himself with it. Such a man thinks of himself not as a body, but as a centre of consciousness.
Man is not traveling from error to truth, but from truth to truth, from lower to higher truth.
The Atman is pure, perfect, it is you and I, it is everyone and everything in the universe.
You have to grow from the inside out. None can teach you, none can make you spiritual. There is no other teacher but your own soul.
The varieties are infinite, and the unit is one. In the Infinite are the finite, and every finite is infinite in nature.
The whole universe is one. There is only one Self in the universe, only One Existence.
Whatever you think, that you will be. If you think yourselves weak, weak you will be; if you think yourselves strong, strong you will be.
Delusion will vanish as the light becomes more and more effulgent, load after load of ignorance will vanish, and then will come a time when all else has disappeared and the sun alone shines.
Desire, ignorance, and inequality—this is the trinity of bondage.
Never think there is anything impossible for the soul. It is the greatest heresy to think so.
Oneness is the secret. The moment a man or a nation loses the sense of oneness, they are on the road to death.
We are responsible for what we are, and whatever we wish ourselves to be, we have the power to make ourselves.
You are the creator of your own destiny.
The brain and muscles must develop simultaneously. Iron nerves with an intelligent brain — and the whole world is at your feet.
Books are infinite in number and time is short. Therefore the secret of knowledge is to take what is essential.
All power is within you; you can do anything and everything. Believe in that, do not believe that you are weak.
Our duty to others means helping others; doing good to the world. Why should we do good to the world? Apparently to help the world, but really to help ourselves.
Who makes us ignorant? We ourselves. We put our hands over our eyes and weep that it is dark.
In one word, this ideal is that you are divine.
The essence of Vedanta is that there is but one Being and that every soul is that Being in full, not a part of that Being.
When an idea exclusively occupies the mind, it is transformed into an actual physical or mental state.
Be not afraid of anything. You will do marvelous work. The moment you fear, you are nobody.
Is there any sexism, any inequality in the soul? God is neither male nor female.
Purity, patience, and perseverance are the three essentials to success and, above all, love.
Meditation is the gate that opens the door to the deeper realms of the soul.
All truth is eternal. Truth is nobody's property; no race, no individual can lay any exclusive claim to it.
We reap what we sow. We are the makers of our own fate. None else has the blame, none has the praise.
May I be born again and again, and suffer thousands of miseries so that I may worship the only God that exists, the only God I believe in, the sum total of all souls—and above all, my God the wicked, my God the miserable, my God the poor of all races.
Know it for certain that there is no greater Tirtha (holy spot) than the body of man.
Religion as a science, as a study, is the greatest and healthiest exercise that the human mind can have.
The whole life is a succession of dreams. My ambition is to be a conscious dreamer, that is all.
Anything that makes you weak physically, intellectually and spiritually, reject it as poison.
The very essence of education is concentration of mind, not the collecting of facts.
Astrology and all these mystical things are generally signs of a weak mind; therefore as soon as they are becoming prominent in our minds, we should see a physician, take good food, and rest.
That which is selfish is immoral, and that which is unselfish is moral.
The greatest truths are the simplest things in the world, simple as your own existence.
Vedanta is the most sublime religion which the world has ever known.
Where there is no struggle, there is no strength.
All the strength and succor you want is within yourselves.
The idea of perfect womanhood is perfect independence.
The remedy for weakness is not brooding over weakness, but thinking of strength.
The Atman alone is eternal. Hospitals will tumble down. Railroad givers will all die. This earth will be blown to pieces, suns wiped out. The Atman endures for ever.
Neither numbers nor powers nor wealth nor learning nor eloquence nor anything else will prevail, but purity, living the life, in one word, anubhava, realisation.
Work and worship, knowledge and devotion, are one and the same in the Bhagavad Gita.
That which tends to increase the divinity in you is virtue, and that which tends to increase brutality in you is vice.
All knowledge is within you; all power is within you. Stand up and express the divinity within you.
So long as millions live in hunger and ignorance, I hold every man a traitor who, having been educated at their expense, pays not the least heed to them.
Meditation is a sort of prayer and prayer is meditation. The highest meditation is to think of nothing.
We must not forget that what I mean by the conquest of the world by spiritual thought is the sending out of the life-giving principles, not the hundreds of superstitions that we have been hugging to our breasts for centuries.
Strength, strength is what the Upanishads speak to me from every page.
No one should be judged by their defects. The great virtues a person has are his or her especially. But their errors are the common weakness of humanity and should never be counted in estimating a person's character.
The world is ready to give up its secrets if we only know how to knock, how to give it the necessary blow.
Bless people when they revile you. Think how much good they are doing by helping to stamp out the false ego.
What I want is muscles of iron and nerves of steel, inside which dwells a mind of the same material as that of which the thunderbolt is made.
Man never progresses from error to truth, but from truth to truth, from lesser truth to higher truth.
To devote your life to the good of all and to the happiness of all is religion. Whatever you do for your own sake is not religion.
If you think about disaster, you will get it. Brood about death and you hasten your demise. Think positively and masterfully, with confidence and faith, and life becomes more secure, more fraught with action, richer in achievement and experience.
Freedom can never be reached by the weak. Throw away all weakness. Tell your body that it is strong, tell your mind that it is strong, and have unbounded faith and hope in yourself.
Have faith that you are all, my brave lads, born to do great things! Let not the barks of puppies frighten you—no, not even the thunderbolts of heaven—but stand up and work!